Now my guest today is an extraordinary woman. The Ugandan climate activist Vanessa
Nakati began her activism back in 2019 by staging a solo climate protest at the gates of the Ugandan
parliament. Now she went on to co-found both the Rise Up movement and Fridays as well for
Future Uganda. She's currently here in Paris as part of a delegation of Ugandan and Tanzanian
activists fighting to drum up opposition to a huge oil pipeline which is under construction
in East Africa. Vanessa Nakati thanks very much for joining us on the program today. Let's start
off by talking about that oil pipeline. I mean it kind of sums up the kind of thing you're fighting
against. Tell us some what it is that you think is is wrong with it. Well first of all the East
Africa crude oil pipeline is you know it has already left thousands of people over 80,000
people displaced and this is a pipeline that is going to contribute to 34.3 million tons of
CO2 every year and this is a pipeline that is going to go through over 200 rivers. A third of
it is going to go through the Lake Victoria basin which is depended on by over 40 million people for
water and also for food. This pipeline is going to go through one of the oldest and you know
largest national parks in Uganda so it threatens the existence of the different species of animals
that call that place a home. So basically the pipeline is already causing so much harm
even before it is you know constructed. How do you counteract though? I mean obviously a lot of
people in Africa say the continent needs to develop and the way to develop is by building pipelines
like this. Inevitably that's going to lead to pollution but how can the continent kind of
develop and grow and take its real place within the world if things like this pipeline aren't
allowed? Well that's true. I really understand when people say that the continent needs to develop
and I also understand when people say these things are going to bring jobs or these things are going
to bring economic progress but you know we've seen how the extraction of oil in some African
countries has only left oil casks in these regions while the corporations that do these investments,
corporations from the global north, all they take is the profits and then they leave the oil spills
and the oil explosions for the people in those African nations. And the other thing you know
we've seen how much damage the fossil fuel industry has done to the planet and also to the people and
we cannot allow to you know develop in that same pattern. There is still a way to lift people out
of poverty. There is still a way to have you know good transportation energy but in a more sustainable
way. There is a need to transition to renewable energy but projects like ECOPE they actually push
African nations on the sidelines of a just transition as European countries or global
north countries are transitioning and you know fixing their nations. They are actually dumping
and you know transferring their emissions to nations like ours. Yeah you talk about global
companies. 24th of March, two days time, Total is publishing a report isn't it on its company's
strategy to try and achieve carbon neutrality. You're not very hopeful for what's going to come
out in that report are you? Well Total says it's going to go net zero by 2050 but it's still allowing
for more decades of environmental destruction. That is not climate leadership. You know that is
not climate action and that is not climate justice. Many times corporations like Total will put out
all these things but it is just greenwash. It is to show that they are transitioning and yet they
are continuing to harm communities like mine. There are people who are directly impacted by
this project who are still waiting for compensation for their land that was taken you know for over
two years now. So Total cannot talk about climate justice while it is destroying biodiversity,
ecosystems and displacing people in countries like mine. So do you think the world has got to
the point then where you can't have the two sitting side by side you can't have that development for
example of the oil industry and at the same time have the renewable energies happening at the same
time that the world needs to move completely towards renewable energy? Yeah I believe the
world needs to move completely to renewable energy. We've seen the harm you know that
fossil fuels has done to the world and it's very sad that those who are least responsible
you know for these emissions they're the ones suffering the most. You know the African continent
is responsible for less than four percent of global emissions but yet the people are already
suffering some of the worst impacts of the climate crisis. The floods, the cyclones, the droughts,
these are things that are already happening. So it is sad when you see that those who are
least responsible are being affected right now and while you know those who caused the climate
crisis they are easily you know transitioning their economies, transitioning their transportation
so it's much easier for them. That's why one of our demands is also climate finance. Climate finance
for nations you know that are vulnerable to the climate crisis. Climate finance for mitigation,
for adaptation and for loss and damage. The global north needs to let the global south
have a just transition. You spoke didn't you at the UN's COP26 climate summit in Glasgow and you
spoke very passionately about the need to decolonise climate solutions in Africa. What do
you mean by that? Well not all climate solutions are actually climate justice. I could give some
examples. Many times we hear you know corporations talk about tree planting campaigns or re-afforestation
and afforestation campaigns but sometimes these campaigns mean that a certain indigenous community
is going to lose their land. You know certain people, certain societies are going to lose their
lands because of some of these projects so that is not climate justice. You will find that the
manufacturing of some of the electric vehicles will mean extreme violence and you know child
labour in certain communities that are you know being impacted already by the climate crisis.
So to me climate justice should not only involve the planet but it should also have the people at
hand. That is true climate justice because if it's just about climate solutions it will only be
climate action and not all climate action is climate justice. I want to talk a bit about you
as well. You're going to meet Pope Francis later today as part of your meeting here and you describe
yourself don't you as a born-again Christian. What is it you're hoping to get from that meeting as a
Christian but also as an activist as well? Well you know as a born-again Christian when I do my
activism you know it goes beyond just speaking for the planet. To me it's like protection of
God's creation and what God handed you know over to us, over to us to protect and to preserve and
to just multiply but not to exploit. So it's you know it's a great privilege for me to meet
one of the you know spiritual leaders in this world. I do honour spiritual leaders and it's a
great privilege that I will meet the Pope and I'm hoping to discuss with the Pope some of the issues
that are already impacting you know the lives of the people in my country and why we need not just
you know the leaders in the world but also spiritual leaders to stand with us for the planet.
And do you think that having that belief is what spurred you on as well to take you know the climate
message across the continent and across the world? Maybe it was actually there but I never realized
it from the beginning but when I started activism it was after seeing all these challenges that
people were already experiencing and I felt I had to do something about it. One thing that comes up
a lot often said you're often dubbed the African Greta Thunberg. How do you feel about that because
on the one hand it identifies you for people who don't know you but on the other hand it must be
slightly irritating I suppose. Well like what I can say is that my true identity is Vanessa Nakate.
That's all I can say. That's a good way of putting it. Yeah that is my true identity.
Yeah and is this something that you want to spend the rest of your life doing? Do you think this is
your career now if you like? I'm not sure because when I started before starting activism I had
other plans as well and found myself doing activism so I would just continue with the
flow and see where the Lord continues to lead me. It's great to talk to you on the program today.
Thanks very much for coming in and talking to us. Vanessa Nakate there joining us here on
France 24. Thanks very much. You're welcome.
